PRO-934 pieces pages (#65)
apostrophecms/a3-docs: docs/guide/piece-pages.md

# Piece index and show pages

> **Piece index pages** allow editors to add pages listing pieces of a particular type. They also allow pieces to have their own web pages -- known as **show pages** in Apostrophe. Show pages are automatically available once an index page and pieces of the matching piece type are created.

Reviewer: **"add pages listing pieces"** is really tripping me up. We're talking about a display page for a all of the items and a template for a single item display page, right?

"They also allow pieces to have their own web pages -- known as **show pages**" -- I think we should remove this.

Author: "Index pages list pieces of a particular type."

Author: "Once an index page is added, each piece will get its own show page..."

> Index pages are added similarly to other [pages](/guide/pages.md) with a few important differences. Basically, these page modules have **1)** two separate template files and **2)** additional piece data available in templates. Piece page modules extend `@apostrophecms/piece-page-type`.

Author: "Follow a similar pattern with a few additional features"

## Creating a piece page module

> A common use for these is a **blog**. The related piece type in that case might come from the `article` piece module (refer to [the pieces guide](/guide/pieces.md#creating-a-piece-type) for more on that). **The piece page would then be a module named `article-page`.**

Reviewer: I've reread this a few times and there are a couple of things that keep confusing me:

1. We call something a blog, and then we never use the word blog again in the code. This just feels a bit weird to me Why is the blog called 'article-page'...I get it in other contexts (Event page, for example). Maybe we can avoid using blog here just to make it easier.
2. I think "related piece type" is a confusing way to say it. When looking through the Statamic examples, it feels like there is a more natural connection.

```javascript
// modules/article-page/index.js
module.exports = {

>   extend: '@apostrophecms/piece-page-type',

Reviewer: Side note: piece-page-type is so weird. piece-type-page? lol.

  options: {
    label: 'Articles Page'
  }
};
```

You would **add this to the `app.js` configuration** [like any other module](/guide/modules.html#setting-up-a-module). You could also add a field schema or other features as on page type modules.

::: tip

> Piece page modules are not required to be named using the piece name plus `-page` suffix. If they are named like that the associated piece type will be found automatically. If you want to name it different, or if you need more than one piece page type for a single piece type, use the [`piecesModuleName` option](/reference/module-api/module-options.md#piecemodulename) to identify the correct piece type.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using the `-page` suffix is optional. When used, the associated piece type will be found automatically. Alternatively, the [`piecesModuleName` option](/reference/module-api/module-options.md#piecemodulename) can be used to identify the correct piece type.
```

:::

> Instead of a single `page.html` template, this module gets two templates.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Piece pages require two templates```

Author: "uses two templates"

| Template file name | What is it? |
| ------------------ | ----------- |
| `index.html` | Template for listing pieces using `data.pieces` (the **"index page**) |

> | `show.html` | Template to display individual piece information using `data.piece` (a **"show page"**) |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `show.html` | Template to display an individual piece using `data.piece` (a **"show page"**) |
```

> Before we go any further, make sure you have reviewed the [page type guide](/guide/pages.md). Everything there also applies to index pages and templating is mostly the same for show pages as well.

Reviewer: "make sure you have reviewed" sounds a little 'dad' heavy. maybe we could try a fun

## The index page template

> Index page templates look very similar to other page templates. Look for the new features in this example blog index page.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Index page templates look very similar to other page templates.
```

```django
{# modules/article-page/views/index.html #}

{% extends "layout.html" %}
{% import '@apostrophecms/pager:macros.html' as pager with context %}

{% block main %}
  <h1>{{ data.page.title }}</h1>

  {% for article in data.pieces %}
    <article>
      <h2>
        <a href="{{ article._url }}">{{ article.title }}</a>
      </h2>
    </article>
  {% endfor %}

  {{ pager.render({
    page: data.currentPage,
    total: data.totalPages,
    class: 'blog-pager'
  }, data.url) }}
{% endblock %}
```

### `data.pieces` and other unique `data` properties

> The first new thing there is the `import` statement, but we'll get back to that. Let's talk about the **loop over `data.pieces`**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The first new thing here is the `import` statement, but we'll get back to that. Let's talk about the **loop over `data.pieces`**.
```

```django
{% for article in data.pieces %}
  <article>
    <h2>
      <a href="{{ article._url }}">{{ article.title }}</a>
    </h2>
  </article>
{% endfor %}
```

> In addition to standard information, index page templates have access to `data.pieces`, which is an array of piece document objects. They will contain the title and URL as shown here, but also contain other piece data. This lets you do things like adding thumbnail images to listed items.

Reviewer: I feel like there has to be a quicker way to say "you can access the piece schema data with `data.pieces`.

Since it's an array, we use the [Nunjucks `for` tag](https://mozilla.github.io/nunjucks/templating.html#for) to loop over the pieces.

The `data` object properties unique to index pages are:

| Property | What is it? |
| -------- | ----------- |
| `pieces` | An array of piece data objects for the current set of results |
| `currentPage` | A number representing what page of results is shown, starting with `1` |
| `totalPages` | The total number of results pages there are |
| `totalPieces` | The total number of pieces across all result pages |

### Pagination

```django
{% import '@apostrophecms/pager:macros.html' as pager with context %}

{{ pager.render({
  page: data.currentPage,
  total: data.totalPages,
  class: 'blog-pager'
}, data.url) }}
```

> Index pages do not list every single piece in a single view. That could quickly become a problem. Instead, they include *ten* pieces on `data.pieces` at a time (by default).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, index pages will list up to *ten* pieces on `data.pieces`.
```
I assume we'll tell people how to change this?

The pager macro is a special template using the [Nunjucks macro](https://mozilla.github.io/nunjucks/templating.html#macro) feature. This particular macro accepts two arguments:

- an object with the `currentPage` and `totalPages` values, described above, as well as an optional CSS class for the pager wrapper
- the page URL, using `data.url`

> Other than the class, the pager macro code above will rarely change.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> **You can change the number of pieces in each page of results** by setting [the `perPage` option](/reference/module-api/module-options.md#perpage-2) on the module. The data passed to templates will all update, so you don't need to make any other adjustments.

Reviewer: Should we move this up to the short statement above?

## The show page template

> As a reminder, show pages are the web pages for individual pieces, rendered from `show.html` templates. This template uses a very standard page template structure. Assuming our `article` piece type example has a single `main` area, it could look like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Show pages are the web pages for individual pieces, rendered from `show.html` templates. Assuming our `article` piece type example has a single `main` area, it could look like this:
```

```django
{# modules/article-page/views/show.html #}
{% extends "layout.html" %}

{% block main %}
  <h1>{{ data.piece.title }}
  <section>
    {% area data.piece, 'main' %}
{% endblock %}
```

> Instead of `data.page`, this template is using `data.piece` to access the piece data. In most other ways they work the same way as any other page template. There are some other special data available in show page templates:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Instead of `data.page`, this template is using `data.piece` to access the piece data. There are some other special data available in show page templates:
```

| Property | What is it? |
| -------- | ----------- |
| `piece` | The document object for the featured piece. In a blog, this would be a single article. |
| `page` | In show page templates, `data.page` still exists, but refers to the index page |
| `previous` | If using the [`previous: true` option](/reference/module-api/module-options.md#previous), `data.previous` is the previous piece based on the [sort](/reference/module-api/module-options.md#sort) |
| `next` | If using the [`next: true` option](/reference/module-api/module-options.md#next), `data.next` is the next piece based on the [sort](/reference/module-api/module-options.md#sort) |

## Index and show page URL basics

Index page URLs, like other page URLs, generally are constructed from the base domain/URL (the home page URL) plus their slug. Page slugs include forward slashes and, by default, the path of their parent page, if they have one.

> If the home page URL was `https://example.rocks` and the "Articles" index page had the slug `/articles`, the "Articles" page URL would be **`https://example.rocks/articles`**. This is the way all Apostrophe pages work.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the home page URL was `https://ben.rocks`, the "Articles" page URL would be **`https://ben.rocks/articles`**.
```

Show pages are extensions of their index page. To that end, their URLs are the index page url plus the piece slug. Piece slugs do not have slashes or look like a URL path on their own since pieces can be used in many ways.

Consider an article "How to write Javascript." Apostrophe would generate the slug `how-to-write-javascript` based on the title. With the index page url `https://example.rocks/articles` and that slug, the show page URL would be **`https://example.rocks/articles/how-to-write-javascript`**.

The structure of index and show page URLs is one of the most clear ways to understand how show pages depend on index pages. Even if this does not seem terribly complex, it is important to understand that relationship.

::: note

> You may create multiple index pages of a particular type. If you do, the related piece show pages can be accessed at URLs based on any of the index pages. So if you create one articles index page with the slug `/articles` and another with `/news`, both of these URLs will go to the same article:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You may create multiple index pages of a particular type. If you do, the related piece show pages can be accessed at URLs based on any of the index pages. For example, if you create one articles index page with the slug `/articles` and another with `/news`, both of these URLs will go to the same article:
```

**Index pages** list pieces of a particular type. Once one is created, each individual piece automatically has its own web page, known in Apostrophe as a **show page**. If you're familiar with blogs, you know this model all too well.

This feature set is powered by the `@apostrophecms/piece-page-type` module (because you're creating a *page type* that displays *pieces*, get it?).

Index pages support all features from [pages](/guide/pages.md), then add on some special features. In short, those are:

- Two template files: one for index pages and one for show pages
- Additional piece data available in templates

## Creating a piece page type

There are two critical steps to adding a new module for a piece page type:

1. Extend `@apostrophecms/piece-page-type`
2. Specify what piece type should be shown on the page

Extending the right module is simple enough. These modules use the property:

```javascript
`extend: '@apostrophecms/piece-page-type',`
```

Identifying the piece type can be done two ways: **using a module naming convention** or **using the `pieceModuleName` setting**. We can look at both options using a blog as our example.

### Matching a piece type using naming

> In this example, the piece type is `article`, since "articles" are the individual things that make up a blog. You can then name the piece page type as `article-page` and Apostrophe will automatically know that the two modules go together. (In case you missed the trick there, the piece page name is: piece type + `-page`.)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this example, the piece type is `article`, since "articles" are the individual entries that make up a blog. If you name the piece page type `article-page`, Apostrophe will automatically know that the two modules go together. (In case you missed the trick there, the piece page name is: piece type + `-page`.)
```

### Specifying the piece type with `pieceModuleName`

This method allows you to name the module whatever you want since you are specifically identifying a piece type. Set the [`pieceModuleName` option](/reference/module-api/module-options.md#piecemodulename) to the piece type name and Apostrophe make the right connection.

```javascript
// modules/blog-page/index.js
module.exports = {
  extend: '@apostrophecms/piece-page-type',
  options: {
    label: 'Blog page',
    pieceModuleName: 'article'
  }
};
```

Either method works well and you may find both options useful depending on the situation.

### Add template files and instantiate

Piece page types use two templates, both added in the module's `views` directory (e.g., `modules/article-page/views/`).

| Template file name | What is it? |
| ------------------ | ----------- |
| `index.html` | Template for listing pieces (the **"index page**) |
| `show.html` | Template to display an individual piece (a **"show page"**) |

We'll review each template's features next.

Once those template files exist, you would **add this to the `app.js` configuration** [like any other module](/guide/modules.html#setting-up-a-module).

> 🛑 Hold up. ✋

Reviewer: cop

Author: 🚔

You've reviewed the [page type guide](/guide/pages.md), right? The sections below will highlight the special features of index and show page templates. For general page template syntax, see that page type guide.

## The index page template

Index page templates look very similar to other page templates.

```django
{# modules/article-page/views/index.html #}

{% extends "layout.html" %}
{% import '@apostrophecms/pager:macros.html' as pager with context %}

{% block main %}
  <h1>{{ data.page.title }}</h1>

  {% for article in data.pieces %}
    <article>
      <h2>
        <a href="{{ article._url }}">{{ article.title }}</a>
      </h2>
    </article>
  {% endfor %}

  {{ pager.render({
    page: data.currentPage,
    total: data.totalPages,
    class: 'blog-pager'
  }, data.url) }}
{% endblock %}
```

### `data.pieces` and other unique `data` properties

> The first new thing here is the `import` statement, but we'll get back to that. Let's talk about the **loop over `data.pieces`**.

Reviewer: Do we go over this or did I miss it. I'm always wary of saying 'hey check out this, but ignore it for now'

Apostrophe's pager macro adds basic, unstyled pagination to view more. The pager macro is a special template using the [Nunjucks macro](https://mozilla.github.io/nunjucks/templating.html#macro) feature. This particular macro accepts two arguments:

1. an object with the `currentPage` and `totalPages` values, described above, as well as an optional CSS class for the pager wrapper
```javascript
{
  page: data.currentPage,
  total: data.totalPages,
  class: 'my-pager-class' // Optional
}
```
2. the page URL, `data.url`

## The show page template

Show pages are the web pages for individual pieces, rendered from `show.html` templates. Assuming our `article` piece type example has a single `main` area, it could look like this:

```django
{# modules/article-page/views/show.html #}
{% extends "layout.html" %}

{% block main %}
  <h1>{{ data.piece.title }}
  <section>
    {% area data.piece, 'main' %}
{% endblock %}
```

> Instead of `data.page`, this template is using `data.piece` to access the piece data. There are some other special data available in show page templates:

Reviewer: I would move this above the example, its sort of the key point.

| Property | What is it? |
| -------- | ----------- |
| `piece` | The document object for the featured piece. In a blog, this would be a single article. |

> | `page` | In show page templates, `data.page` still exists, but refers to the index page |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `page` | In show page templates, `data.page` refers to the index page |
```
